---
layout: post
title: "An objective comparison between D and C++"
description: ""
category: 
tags: []
---

I usually tend to jump a lot between languages, especially D and C++. I created a hopefully objective list of differences between D and C++ to remind me why I am staying with one of those languages.

#General
D has modules which results in faster build times compared to C++. C++ might get modules in C++17.

D supports local imports which makes it easy to move functions into different files.

{% highlight c++ %}
void foo(){
    import std.stdio: writeln;
    writeln("foo");
}
{% endhighlight %}


D has integrated `unittests` and can be written directly in the source file that you want to test. This means you can write `unittests` directly under the function that you are testing.

`class` and `struct` have a different meaning in C++ and D. In C++ they almost identical, just with different visibility defaults. In D structs can not use inheritance or interfaces. While classes can have inheritance and interfaces but lack support for deterministic destructors. A full list of differences can be found [here](https://dlang.org/spec/struct.html). Classes in D are usually allocated, but they can also be allocated on the stack. Classes are by default reference types. If `T` is a class then it implicitly is `T*`.

D comes with a default GC while C++ is GC free. D can also be used without a GC but there are a few inconveniences. First the standard library(phobos) in D is not move aware. This means you can not have a `std::vector<std::unique_ptr>` in phobos. It is possible to write your own containers that are move aware which means it is possible to have an array or vector with unique pointers.

Moving in C++ is just an rvalue cast while in D it really moves. In C++ you would write a function `template<class T> void foo(T&& t){}`, it moves if `t` is an rvalue and takes `t` by ref if it is an lvalue. In D you would create two functions `void foo(T)(ref T t){}` which always captures lvalues by references and `void foo(T)(T t){}` which only captures rvalues. As far as I know moving in D is also not exception safe.

In D you can not customize the default constructor, every type needs exception free default construction and this must be known at compile time. It is possible to have custom default values as long as they are known at compile time.

{% highlight c++ %}
struct Foo{
  int i = 42;
}
{% endhighlight %}
C++ has a `static_cast` while D does not. As far as I know it is possible to create a static cast at compile time with meta programming in D, see this [answer](http://stackoverflow.com/a/35701007/944430) for more information.

D as well as C++ can disable default construction, copy construction and copy assignment. Note that in D it is still possible to call `T.init` even if the default constructor is disabled.

In C++ local references can escape the scope while in D they can't.

The allocator in C++ is a template argument (at least in the STL) while in D it can be changed at runtime. This means that you can have different allocators inside an array. You can find more information [here](https://dlang.org/phobos/std_experimental_allocator.html).

C++ needs explicit function specifiers such as `noexcept` `const` `constexpr` while in D they are inferred if the function/method is a template. This means that `void foo(T)(...)nothrow, const, pure, @nogc{}` can just be `void foo(T)(...)`.

Functions and methods in D can be called without parenthesis if they have no arguments. `void foo(){}; foo;`

C++ as well as D have anonymous functions. C++: `[](auto a, auto b){ return a + b;}` , D: `(a, b) => a + b` or `(a, b){return a + b;}`. As far as I know capturing other variables requires the GC in D. In C++ you can explicitly capture variables by copy, ref or move. Lambda functions in D can not return references.

Copies in D are always shallow. This means that copying an `Array` only copies the state of the array not the elements itself. Deep copying needs to be implemented manually, for example with a `.dup` method. C++ copies are deep, you can avoid deep copies by passing by reference. `void foo(std::vector<Foo> const& v){}`

Unlike in C++ the order of declarations doesn't matter in D.

D has built in documentation comments. In C++ you have to use an external tool such as doxygen.

D has `alias this` which makes composition of types without inheritance really easy.
{% highlight c++ %}
struct Foo{
  Bar bar;
  alias bar this;
}
{% endhighlight %}

The code above forwards all methods and members from `Bar` to `Foo` and makes `Foo` implicitly convertible to `Bar`. The implicit conversion can be removed by using `Proxy` instead of alias this.

Operator of overloading in C++ `Foo Foo::operator+(Foo const& foo){}` where in D you `Foo opBinary(string op)(in Foo f)`. This allows the [mixin macros pattern](http://wiki.dlang.org/Mixin_Macros_Pattern) which can remove a lot of boilerplate code for you.

D has universal function call syntax (ufcs). This just means that functions can also be called like methods `foo(bar)` or `bar.foo()`. This is similar to extension methods in C#. C++17 might also get some form of ufcs.
{% highlight c++ %}
{% endhighlight %}
#Meta programming

It is possible to pass almost anything to a template in D. C++ is limited to integrals and chars.

Template instantiations are done in C++ with `<Foo,Bar>` and in D with `!(Foo,bar)`.

D has no fold expressions like C++ `foo(f(args)...);`, although they can be implemented as a library.

D can evaluate almost any function at compile time, where in C++ those functions need to be marked as `constexpr` and have a restrictions such as no allocations.

C++ can have multiple variadic templates `template<class... As, class... Bs>` but they need to be inferred. This is not possible in D but you can have templates of templates `contains!SomeTypes.all!SomeOtherTypes`.

D can generate strings at compile time and compile them at compile time with `mixin`, this is not possible in C++.

C++ has macros while D does not. `mixins` are capable of replacing macros.

D has static reflection/introspection, this feature might come to C++ after C++17. This can currently be emulated to some extent with `libclang`.

D also has `user defined attributes` `@Encrypted string name;` which can be used by D's static introspection.

D can print any type at compile time or runtime with `writeln(SomeType.stringof)` or `writeln(typeof(somevar).stringof)`. Anything that is available at compile time can be printed at compile time with `pragma(msg, SomeType)`. This is very useful for debugging meta programs. C++ can only do this with some compiler hacks as far as I know.

It is possible to pass `symbols` to templates in D. `template Foo(alias someSymbol)` This just means that it is possible to pass anything that is available at compile time into `Foo`. Examples would be other templates, functions, lambdas, constants etc. This is similar to Lisp.

D has `static if`. It is possible to use template specialization in C++ to achieve something similar.

(Unsure, need more benchmarks) Compile times for meta programming seems to be roughly equivalent between C++ and D.

In D it is possible to iterate over variadic types with a foreach loop. In C++ this can be achieved as a library, for example with [Boost hana](https://github.com/boostorg/hana).
{% highlight c++ %}
foreach(index, type; VaradicTypes){
}
{% endhighlight %}

Variadics in D are automatically expanded while in C++ you expand them explicitly with fold expressions.

Variadics in D can be sliced `VariadicTypes[1 .. $]` this creates a variadic type list without the first type.

#Tooling
D has a official build tool / package manager called Dub. C++ has literally dozens of different build systems and package managers which would be too much to list. The most widespread build system is cmake.

C++ has battle proven compilers such as MSVC, Clang and GCC. D has DMD(offical), LDC, GDC and SDC. I can not comment on the quality of those compilers.

(No complete list) C++ has many different IDE's and tools like Visual Studio, QtCreator, Visual Assist, CLion, libclang and many more. D has few plugins for some IDE's like Eclipse, Intellij and Monodevelop. It also has a few tools [DCD](https://github.com/Hackerpilot/DCD), [dfmt](https://github.com/Hackerpilot/dfmt) and [dscanner](https://github.com/Hackerpilot/Dscanner). Most those seem to be driven by one person.

{% highlight c++ %}
{% endhighlight %}

